JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The U
Department ends its program to t
rebels in the fight against the
Then: chaos on Capitol Hill. Rep
to find someone to lead the Hous
Mark Shields and David Brooks ar
analyze another very full week o
Plus, a very different political
letting dogs run free in a natio
SAMIR GHOSH, Dog Owner: People l
dogs like their children. My fam
do things without the dog. We do
the movies because you can't bri
I moved to San Francisco because
it as a progressive place and ve
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: A rising chorus o
voices in the U.S. House of Repr
urged Paul Ryan today to run for
heal a badly divided party.
The Wisconsin congressman held t
two spot on the GOP presidential
2012, but it remained unclear if
the top job in the House or if r
conservatives would support him.
the story in full later in the p
President Obama faced gun rights
this afternoon in Oregon, after
community college shooting. Hund
gathered near the airport in Ros
president arrived to meet with s
victims' relatives.
Later, he emerged with the mayor
BARACK OBAMA, President of the U
We're going to have to come toge
country to see how we can preven
from taking place. But today is
families, their grief and the lo
for them. And they certainly do
all the support that they have r
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Roseburg gunm
nine people and wounded nine oth
taking his own life.
Shooting episodes broke out at t
across the nation today. In Flag
a gunman opened fire on four fra
at Northern Arizona University,
Police charged a freshman with m
in Houston, a student was killed
housing complex at Texas Souther
Police detained two people.
The U.S. military has admitted f
its effort to train rebels in Sy
was 5,400 fighters, but it only
Today's announcement means that
go instead to Kurdish fighters b
Islamic State group. We will deb
U.S. should do next in Syria aft
summary.
This year's Nobel Peace Prize go
that pushed Tunisia away from ci
the Arab spring revolution of 20
National Dialogue Quartet includ
industry, human rights and legal
They helped to fashion a caretak
led by Mehdi Jomaa.
MEHDI JOMAA, Former Tunisian Pri
I am happy for Tunisia because t
Quartet is a recognition of the
and successful experience in the
transition, and as well a recogn
method and the way we handled an
the difficulties in Tunisia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tunisia's revolut
the Arab spring, but it's the on
in the region to build a democra
Instead of peace, a new wave of
gripping Israelis and Palestinia
reached a new peak today as Isra
shot and killed six protesters.
erupted in chaotic scenes along
where young Palestinians rolled
and threw rocks. Meanwhile, the
Hamas in Gaza praised a recent r
attacks on Israelis. And there w
today, including an apparent rev
by a Jewish man who knifed four
Israel.
In Iraq, at least 35 people died
attack in the country's east; 45
wounded. Police say the bombardm
around Baqubah in Diyala provinc
State group has staged several r
there.
Migrant arrivals on the Greek is
surged to at least 7,000 a day,
beat the onset of winter. More a
Lesbos today, as the Internation
for Migration reported a sharp i
September. Meanwhile, in Italy,
wave of Eritrean refugees depart
as part of the European Union's
plan.
MELISSA FLEMING, Spokesman, U.N.
for Refugees: This relocation sc
really important step towards st
the refugee crisis in Europe. It
work if it takes place at the en
of Europe, and it can only work
facilities are created above and
we have in Italy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: More than half-a-
have fled to Europe so far this
Back in this country, the city o
South Carolina, will pay $6.5 mi
killing of an unarmed black susp
with Walter Scott's family was a
night. He was shot repeatedly as
a white policeman last April. Th
was fired and he is now charged
The U.S. House today voted to li
ban on crude oil exports. Suppor
that lifting the ban would creat
lower prices at the pump. Oppone
it would benefit big oil at the
consumers. The White House has w
veto if the bill clears the Sena
And on Wall Street, stocks finis
winning week. The Dow Jones indu
gained 33 points to close above
Nasdaq rose 19 points and the S&
just a point. For the week, the
well over 3.5 percent, the S&P r
and the Nasdaq was up 2.5 percen
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
pulls the plug on a program to t
rebels; Republicans in the House
to find a new leader; Mark Shiel
Brooks on the week's news, and m
The Pentagon announced today tha
a program to train and equip mod
fighting the Islamic State.
Ultimately, only a few dozen fig
in the half-a-billion-dollar pro
some of the weapons they were gi
U.S. ended up in the hands of IS
Defense Secretary Ashton Carter
of the program's overhaul during
with his British counterpart in
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense Secr
satisfied with the early efforts
and so we're looking at differen
achieve the basically the same k
objective, which is the right on
to enable capable, motivated for
ground to retake territory from
Syrian territory from extremism.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Pentagon effo
derided for producing only a han
fighters. Now its focus will shi
Kurdish forces in Northwestern S
made gains against the Islamic S
Separately, the CIA continues tr
rebels to fight the Assad regime
comes as the situation in Syria
dramatically, with government tr
a renewed offensive in Hama and
They have been helped by Russian
launched from ships in the Caspi
Russian airstrikes launched from
inside Syria.
QUESTION: The Russians are condu
operations in the Middle East.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But in a "60 Minu
airing this Sunday on CBS, Presi
argues Russia is hurting itself
leadership.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the U
If you think that running your e
the ground and having to send tr
order to prop up your only ally,
then we have got a different def
leadership.
JUDY WOODRUFF: U.S. officials al
the Russian campaign is targetin
rebels, and not the Islamic Stat
And we take a closer look now wi
He's a former assistant secretar
for public affairs during the Ob
He also had a 26-year career in
Force. And David Kramer, former
secretary of state during the Ge
administration.
Gentlemen, welcome to you both.
DAVID KRAMER, Former U.S. Assist
of State: Thank you.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, P.J. Crowley,
think? Is this a good thing, tha
to train the rebels in Syria is
P.J. CROWLEY, Former U.S. Assist
of State for Public Affairs: Wel
a failure.
It was a good idea, but was so h
to try to avoid -- so you would
going just to the good guys with
hats and avoid assistance bleedi
the guys with the murkier hats.
heavily structured, it had very
I don't think we're surprised th
not a program that was by itself
tip the scales on the battlefiel
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Kramer, how
it?
DAVID KRAMER: I agree it was a f
it should have been changed a lo
My concern is the timing of the
It looks like we're retreating i
of this Russian advance, the Rus
intervention. And it makes us lo
than we perhaps are. The program
It was just focused on the Islam
It wasn't designed to deal with
regime and the Assad regime is r
main source behind all the probl
seeing in Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What the Pentagon
they're going to focus on arming
rebels fighting ISIS in Northern
that a good substitute for this?
DAVID KRAMER: This should have b
ago. The fact that this has take
that it has produced so few resu
that it is a failure.
But pulling the plug now, announ
I would have preferred they just
making a big public announcement
We just look like we're running
the Russians.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We look like we'r
away, P.J. Crowley?
P.J. CROWLEY: Well, I don't put
context of a U.S.-Russian strugg
We have our issues with Russia.
can be handled beyond Syria. But
behind this is two judgments by
administration. The first is tha
politically to get rid of Bashar
the sooner the better, but milit
not going to go to war with Bash
to achieve that result.
Obviously, we have made that one
Russia is making a different jud
in terms of the Syrian conflict,
just one conflict. It's several.
administration has yet to develo
there's a military course of act
the situation better at an accep
or at an acceptable level of ris
JUDY WOODRUFF: So you're saying
doesn't have an approach yet? Is
you're saying?
P.J. CROWLEY: The administration
a military approach to Syria. It
military approach to Iraq.
But the reality here -- and I li
little bit to the Bosnia experie
early 1990s -- is that we just m
have to wait a period of time be
presents itself for a peaceful n
settlement.
Unfortunately, all of the combat
now still believe that they can
objectives through military acti
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Kramer, why
a good option now?
DAVID KRAMER: We have had 250,00
people killed. We have half of S
displaced since this all started
We now have Russian intervention
massive refugee flow into Europe
bombing is going to increase the
going into Europe. Jordan is des
Turkey is having enormous proble
has violated its sovereignty and
integrity by invading its airspa
are possible Article V implicati
since Turkey is a member of NATO
We have just let this problem fe
only gotten worse with time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But what about th
-- P.J. Crowley, you were going
P.J. CROWLEY: I agree with every
David just said, but it doesn't
to a clear position, unless we'r
to insert ourselves into an Iraq
to take control of the situation
and try to impose a solution.
And, as we saw in Iraq, that has
significant, you know, unintende
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, David Kramer,
that? There is the real worry if
gets involved, it gets sucked in
in, and can't get out.
DAVID KRAMER: The Turks had indi
time ago that they were prepared
in if the United States provided
support.
So, we should create safe zones.
create no-fly zones. We should e
for any planes that would threat
in those areas, whether they're
or Russian planes. We should giv
full notice that any violations
on those zones would constitute
that we would have to respond to
Nobody wants this. There are bad
that have to be made here, but t
we are right now. And I think un
that, we will continue to see pe
we will continue to see people f
so there aren't any good solutio
to find the least worst options.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But my question i
an entire new level of risk, U.S
shot down, U.S. troops get poten
not to mention a conflict, poten
with Russia, unintentional?
DAVID KRAMER: We have the Turks
indicated a willingness to go ah
have other countries, including
although they're not great contr
this kind of operation.
The United States could provide
to provide the cover that way. I
is a way of doing this without p
forces on the ground, but there
good options here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why isn't that on
that could work?
P.J. CROWLEY: Well, safe zones a
approach, but it involves a deci
to war against Bashar al-Assad.
has its own set of circumstances
what the United States is...
JUDY WOODRUFF: What's the bigges
to that?
P.J. CROWLEY: Well, it's a very
space.
We see situations now where, you
planes, in doing what they're do
over into, you know, Turkish air
one thing we need to avoid above
else is making a Syrian civil wa
conflict between the United Stat
We didn't want to do that in Ukr
want to do that in Syria.
So, I think the Obama administra
decided, right or wrong, that th
a military solution to the situa
that has materialized yet, and s
patience. As David said, that is
the Syrian people, but the Unite
the meantime is focused on what
is its vital interest, defeating
the Islamic State.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what are the
you have about doing that? What
if the U.S. continues to wait, a
says?
DAVID KRAMER: Despite what the p
in the "60 Minutes" clip that we
Putin has done is demonstrated i
come to the defense of his allie
The United States is not coming
of the forces that it tried to s
train. So, the image of the Unit
is we aren't there, we aren't re
will be there in the greatest ti
That makes me incredibly uncomfo
is taking a bad situation and ma
of it. We are taking a bad situa
I fear, making it worse by doing
(CROSSTALK)
P.J. CROWLEY: But Putin still ha
And in the process, his ally is
allies are our Sunni state allie
over time, that is a more sustai
I do think we should confront Ru
we can do it in other ways, avoi
sure that Putin is able to play
across Ukraine. We can impose co
but that doesn't mean we have to
the middle of a civil war.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A valuable conver
P.J. Crowley, David Kramer, we t
DAVID KRAMER: Thanks very much.
P.J. CROWLEY: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The House has gon
the weekend, without Republicans
on a choice for the new speaker.
But the loudest rumblings today
party's 2012 vice presidential n
now chairs the Ways and Means Co
Political director Lisa Desjardi
story.
LISA DESJARDINS: House Republica
this morning, waiting to hear fr
who's now at the center of their
storm.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R), Wisconsin: I
nothing new to say.
LISA DESJARDINS: Until now, Cong
Ryan of Wisconsin had flatly rej
for speaker. But the pressure ke
and the appeals grew louder.
REP. DARRELL ISSA (R), Californi
except carry his gym bag this mo
to get him to do it. The fact is
is the right man right now.
LISA DESJARDINS: Peter King of N
for many moderates who had backe
John Boehner, and then Kevin McC
dropped out yesterday.
REP. PETER KING (R), New York: I
Ryan right now has the clout, he
that he could overcome a lot, he
sides together. It would be hard
to confront Paul Ryan and say he
Republican or saying he's not lo
LISA DESJARDINS: Even conservati
of Utah, who's running himself,
support Ryan.
But members of the Freedom Caucu
push out Boehner and derail McCa
aren't jumping the Ryan bandwago
point.
REP. JOHN FLEMING (R), Louisiana
that, for us, much of it has to
process, empowering individual m
the constituents that send us he
not always about the personality
to do with the process.
LISA DESJARDINS: Others, like Ch
of Pennsylvania, worried that ev
not be able to bridge the deep d
the Republican Conference.
REP. CHARLIE DENT (R), Pennsylva
challenge is not who we put in t
chair. The issue is, how do we c
underlying political dynamic tha
this position in the first place
LISA DESJARDINS: For now, all ey
on the quiet office of Paul Ryan
a spokesman says the Wisconsin c
is still not running for speaker
Boehner says he will stay on as
a successor is finally elected.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now to the an
Shields and Brooks. That's syndi
Mark Shields and New York Times
David Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
So, please explain what is going
Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: Sure, Judy.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: Turmoil, chaos, to
And those are the friendly sourc
describing what's going on in th
Caucus.
What you basically have is a gro
one-sixth of the House Republica
their election as a mandate to s
oppose the Democratic president
by their judgment, in power, to
him, to oppose him, and to repea
Obama thing, and do not accept t
responsibility of the governing
which they're a member, to gover
They're the majority party, and
essentially holding the entire c
JUDY WOODRUFF: But they're holdi
I mean, the House of Representat
MARK SHIELDS: They're holding th
it means that the majority canno
the House.
Speaker Boehner after four years
have had enough, leaving. Kevin
his heir apparent, could not get
You have to get a majority of yo
There's 247 House Republicans. Y
get 218 of them in order to get
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
MARK SHIELDS: So, I guess that's
simply. And so there is paralysi
And the party is in turmoil. And
implication nationally in the pr
election, because this is suppos
governing example of the Republi
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, why has it
this point?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, as usual, Ma
critical enough of the Republica
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: It's not that they
in the Democratic president. The
in the democratic process.
There is a way you do elections.
an argument. You have candidates
the candidates. You have a vote,
wins and the minority says, well
get the majority, but, OK, we wi
because we believe in the greate
Well, there are 40 people who do
in that. McCarthy would have had
And they said, no, we don't care
going to -- we're not giving up.
going to roadblock.
And there has been a set of inst
practices that have been built u
institution, and they're just no
by those rules. And so, as has b
the Tea Party for a long time, t
good at destruction, they're not
construction.
And this is -- to me, it's deep.
been a party, and particularly o
political system, that's lost th
argument and then coming to conc
to get elected, especially as a
you have got to be anti-conserva
have got to be radical, you have
revolutionary, you have got to b
your language has to be totally
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we're seeing
presidential race.
DAVID BROOKS: Right. And so if y
radical rhetoric, then the norma
of politics, which is compromise
accepting defeat for the greater
that stuff gets washed away.
And so, to me, it's just a menta
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is it going to ge
Mark? At some point, they will h
a speaker of the House of Repres
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, at some point
ballots. I don't know, Judy.
But when you have got a group in
who believe that compromise is c
and that cooperation is surrende
of principle, that makes it very
I think David's point is very we
I mean, the Republican Party in
Journal/NBC national poll was at
favorable, 45 percent unfavorabl
you're a Republican candidate fo
that's a big weight to carry, an
And if you have got this kind of
on, this "Animal House" behavior
you say, what's the point of ele
It's just a gift to the Democrat
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, but you als
view, when Donald Trump announce
saw yesterday at an event where
believe it was in Nevada, David,
cheered that Kevin McCarthy had
meaning there was nobody.
Chris Christie said yesterday th
doesn't really care who is speak
House of Representatives.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. I think, for
was a dodge, though even Christi
pretty establishmentarian, if yo
watching his campaigning, he's b
the Republican establishment as
Obama, it seems, sometimes.
And so that's become a cheap app
But I have a sort of counterintu
If you look at the polls and you
want there to be a government sh
majorities of Republicans do not
shutdown. They do not want chaos
Hill.
And so they're sitting out there
majority, sitting out there, tak
at this, and think, this is my p
my goodness. And I happen to fee
winter, there is going to be a l
against all this, as there was a
Cruz the last time he and his il
government shutdown, and there w
toward the more normal candidate
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mean when we
primaries, the presidential prim
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. I think that
going to -- you remember what ha
Ted Cruz. When he did a governme
last time, the party, the establ
of the party was strengthened. A
this mayhem, with Ted Cruz invol
way, is going to, in the end of
the Rubios, the Bushes, the Kasi
kind of person.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Mark, this i
individual. This is 30, 40, 50 m
the House of Representatives, ea
represents, what, 600,000, 700,0
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
Judy, there's historical precede
a parallel. In 1996, Bob Dole wa
for the Republican presidential
had a long and distinguished car
Senate majority leader. And beca
behavior and the chaos at the ti
by the House Republicans led by
and closing down the federal gov
Dole had to distance himself.
He resigned from the Senate and
majority leader to say, look, I
with these guys. I'm surgically
from them.
And if you're a presidential can
they say, OK, you are going to g
president now, and these are the
going to deal with, these are th
going to govern with, so it is -
Charming, the rescuer is Paul Ry
chairman of the House Ways and M
That's who...
JUDY WOODRUFF: But he says he's
MARK SHIELDS: He says he's not i
The one advantage Paul Ryan brin
in my judgment, he is -- his tru
as a conservative are unimpeacha
great strength of Nancy Pelosi a
when she was speaker -- and she
speaker -- was that she could go
in her own caucus, especially wo
on the health care, and say, you
to come and compromise on this,
Latino members, you're going to
on this, because her credentials
He could do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You believe that
the conservative members of the
they should not -- that they sho
with funding Planned Parenthood
go along with raising the debt c
MARK SHIELDS: I think his creden
are strong and believable, that
them to the point where we have
our cause and advance it.
I just -- I think that's the one
he brings that Boehner and McCar
were doubts about them, because
as they might be to you and me,
not conservative enough for the
JUDY WOODRUFF: You agree with th
DAVID BROOKS: Well, Boehner's no
Bernie Sanders.
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: He's a pretty cons
himself.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: But, first of all,
Ryan doesn't do it. I believe pe
get -- once they get their dream
should be able to have their dre
And, second, I'm dubious that it
I am even looking on my e-mail t
the Tea Party people who I'm on
and, oh, he was for immigration
was against the government shutd
for this, he was for that. You a
to see the chipping away.
And so I think, at the end of th
I said earlier, I think the prob
deep, and so I hope he doesn't d
own sake and I don't think he wo
effective.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's talk about
party for a few minutes.
The Democrats have their first d
up next week. It's going to be H
and four others, Bernie Sanders
others. I was fortunate enough t
to talk to Secretary Clinton thi
And she made news, David, by spl
the president on the new trade a
the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a
of other moves she seems to be m
left. Is this a smart move for h
or not-so-smart move?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, she was unde
so, you know, so she had to choo
heels.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: I think it's crazy
She has talked in favor of the T
in public. She calls it the gold
of trade agreements. I think she
she actually believes about it a
flipping for political expedienc
it buys you something on policy
you don't have an argument with
in your first debate on trade, a
difficult for Democrats.
But her main problem and the way
in my view, is not how you stand
that agreement. It's on characte
her main doubts, the doubts abou
about authenticity and trustwort
flip-flopping this nakedly doesn
help.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Mark, she sa
changing her mind, that she didn
-- she never really committed on
and now that she's looked at it,
think it's the right thing to do
MARK SHIELDS: When somebody appe
their public position, if they c
they're growing, if they go the
they're caving.
And this is -- Hillary Clinton h
an position on this; 82 percent
Democrats had been against givin
authority for this trade agreeme
an agreement forged between a De
and a Republican Congress and th
community.
That's what it is. So, it's in t
interests. The establishment is
the knock on Hillary Clinton? Sh
to the establishment. And now sh
on the establishment. The New Yo
The Wall Street Journal, The Was
editorial pages, they are all fo
The last thing they were for was
of Iraq. So, quite honestly, I m
think that she can be accused of
on this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But was it smart
do?
MARK SHIELDS: Was it smart for h
I don't know.
I mean, I think it probably -- y
right. It cuts down an opportuni
for her in the first debate. But
she would do it just for that. I
trying to solidify the Democrati
DAVID BROOKS: These are logical
Iraq -- you should go to the Oly
long jump.
MARK SHIELDS: No, but the establ
establishment -- no.
DAVID BROOKS: Listen, she was on
CNN had a list, and I read them
statements about this specific t
gold standard for it, because it
the -- it sets an environment fo
fair and free trade.
And, I mean, she's on the record
And it was her State Department
of the deal. And so everyone els
it as a flip-flop.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For the record, s
was early on, and it was before.
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: And the two things
to you as complaining against we
direction in the course of the n
They didn't go away from her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Currency manipula
DAVID BROOKS: Right, and the pha
stuff.
And so it just -- it's so politi
I understand why she did it for
expedience, but...
MARK SHIELDS: She -- to the best
she hasn't said anything on it f
She was a good team member, back
was pushing for at the time, and
convince Democrats, I assume, at
But now she's a free agent. This
record.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly, Mar
you look for in this debate? Is
at the OK Corral, or is it...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: To borrow one of D
look for a signature moment for
who are being introduced, the Ji
the Martin O'Malley, that there'
is their chance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Lincoln Chafe
MARK SHIELDS: And Lincoln Chafee
And also to get a sense of the d
Sanders has a great advantage. B
hasn't changed a position in 35
he doesn't have to agonize over,
or qualifying in any way? Anyway
be anxiety-free.
DAVID BROOKS: I wonder how stron
going to go after her on charact
matters.
MARK SHIELDS: They won't.
DAVID BROOKS: Mark says they won
So, that's my instinct, too. But
vulnerability. And maybe future
they have to. It's kind of sort
to go after each other. But they
gentle. If I'm one of the minor
I might look for that signature
going right at her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think we're all
be watching.
David Brooks, Mark Shields, we t
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": Cha
has the latest conversation in o
series; and a battle in San Fran
keeping dogs on a leash.
But first a warning: Our next st
graphic images of children and a
disabled by mercury poisoning. I
to some viewers.
The "NewsHour"'s P.J. Tobia has
the latest in a series by photog
C. Price. It was produced in par
the Pulitzer Center on Crisis Re
Small-scale gold mining is wides
the developing world. It's one o
sources of mercury pollution on
health effects of this heavy met
and deadly.
P.J. TOBIA: This is Nyimas (ph).
in Sulawesi, Indonesia. Just 8 y
she has the body of an emaciated
severe brain damage. Her head is
oversized. She suffers from hydr
a buildup of fluid in the brain.
her is a struggle.
Her mother actually chews her fo
before pushing the grains of ric
mouth.
PUASI, Mother (through translato
still like a baby. At night, she
It's difficult for her to sleep.
watch her all night. She will as
her over. It's just me by myself
helps.
P.J. TOBIA: Nyimas' illness is j
what some Indonesians call the u
Medical experts say conditions l
all too common in the area. They
intoxication. It's caused when p
the toxic metal.
PUASI (through translator): Ther
people burning mercury all aroun
front of our house. My husband b
well, but I don't let him do it
P.J. TOBIA: Small-scale gold min
source of income throughout Sula
mercury is key to the process.
It's first used to separate rock
from gold dust in these makeshif
called ball mills. Later, bare h
the mercury and gold into a ball
is next burnt away with torches.
toxic clouds float through the v
into the lungs and blood streams
When Nyimas' mother was pregnant
her father worked in the gold pr
The village they live in now has
process gold using mercury 24 ho
Dr. Stephan Bose-O'Reilly is a v
BaliFokus, an Indonesian non-gov
organization that tries to educa
about the dangers of working wit
DR. STEPHAN BOSE-O'REILLY, BaliF
to the ball mills, there are the
ponds. And next to them are the
and the people here feed on that
the local fish, on the local ric
rice and the fish takes up mercu
form of metal mercury.
P.J. TOBIA: Medical and environm
conducted by BaliFokus and the I
government have shown that 10 pe
in some parts of the country suf
intoxication.
Mercury poisoning can be found t
Sulawesi, a poor, centrally loca
in Indonesian archipelago. But s
gold mining using liquid mercury
throughout Asia, Africa and the
According to the U.N., it's one
contributors to global mercury p
Ten-year-old Dita's (ph) parents
a mercury-burning business. As a
she began to have trouble walkin
her condition worsened. Eventual
bamboo hut became her entire wor
Dita's mother suffers from heari
gets headaches, also symptoms of
In tests conducted by BaliFokus
28 children living in or near go
hot spots suffered from multiple
including neurological problems,
seizures, vision loss, deafness
Since the research was conducted
the children died. One was Dita.
away just last week. But it's no
Tahoonda (ph) is was 45 years ol
DR. STEPHAN BOSE-O'REILLY: This
healthy farmer living here, doin
work, like crushing ore. And the
of years ago, he started to beco
felt that he can't coordinate hi
anymore, that he can't walk prop
P.J. TOBIA: His condition worsen
month.
DR. STEPHAN BOSE-O'REILLY: This
neurological disease. It disable
life. He has problems to follow
He's severely sick.
P.J. TOBIA: Dr. Bose-O'Reilly sa
illness come from the gold proce
him day and night.
DR. STEPHAN BOSE-O'REILLY: You c
to his house is a ball mill. You
hear it here in the room.
P.J. TOBIA: According to tests c
the area, mercury levels are 50
levels recommended by the United
Pahir (ph) worked with mercury m
life. He's shown here in his mid
tested by a doctor from BaliFoku
barely carry out simple hand-eye
tasks, like touching his nose wh
are closed or placing these matc
their box. Pahir died just weeks
pictures were taken.
DR. STEPHAN BOSE-O'REILLY: The k
is normal. It's not more or less
in Indonesia, and there are hund
like this, in villages where gol
performed and mercury is used.
P.J. TOBIA: In 2014, the Indones
banned the importation, trade an
in small-scale gold mining, but
are not widely enforced. And liq
is still easy to come by in plac
Dr. Muchtarudin Mansyur is a dir
Indonesian Ministry of Health. H
mercury use is widespread throug
DR. MUCHTARUDIN MANSYUR, Indones
of Health: Eight hundred hot spo
250,000 workers.
P.J. TOBIA: Even still, Mansyur
the government has not done much
use of mercury.
DR. MUCHTARUDIN MANSYUR: In mini
have done is a bit limited, but
find the better choice, to repla
I mean.
P.J. TOBIA: People in Nyimas' vi
talk much about the dangers of t
metal, even as it sickens them.
PUASI (through translator): We h
spoken to our neighbors about it
the village discusses it.
P.J. TOBIA: So, mercury continue
producing golden products and de
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm P.J.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next, the latest
in our race matters series.
Tonight, Charlayne Hunter-Gault
the color of your skin affects y
racial tensions.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Here in
Department of the University of
Amherst, classes like this one f
of race and the vastly different
between blacks and whites of rac
with blacks far more pessimistic
by almost every measure.
One of the department's leading
studied the racial divide and ho
it is Linda Tropp, director of t
Violence Program. Thank you for
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Professo
you for joining us.
LINDA TROPP, Peace and Violence
University of Massachusetts Amhe
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: You have
lot about race and how it's a ta
because it's anxiety-producing.
mean by that?
LINDA TROPP: Yes.
If we think about the types of b
manifestations of anxiety, thing
less eye contact, shifting away,
farther back, or maintaining gre
distance, all of those might be
due to racial anxiety, but, in a
they might be interpreted by the
or the person you're interacting
hostility or rejection.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But why
anxiety?
LINDA TROPP: I think in part bec
of our focus has been on reducin
and we haven't focused as much o
people with the skills to actual
cross-group intersections succes
with ease and comfort and confid
And I think what often happens i
feel anxious, we kind of shut do
a little more likely to depend o
for how we perceive people and h
to people. So, if we give people
for real engagement across group
these need to be repeated action
just be one experience.
And often for those folks who sa
and it went terribly, I try to r
when you first try to learn how
you don't know how to hold the r
When you're first learning a lan
not automatically fluent, that t
take time to cultivate, and that
we actually engage meaningfully
boundaries, the greater facility
doing so, the greater ease and c
experience.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: How do y
as a part of this whole equation
LINDA TROPP: Yes, absolutely.
Well, fear, especially from the
of members of the black communit
being policed, you know, lives a
I can understand completely how
be fear. And, you know, talking
about the manifestation of fear,
this sense that members of the b
are not part of the community th
are designed to serve and protec
There is the sense of separation
considered a perpetrator of crim
part of the public that should b
so the police are not for me or
From the white perspective, I th
a lot of fear, especially when y
white police officers in black c
I think there has perhaps been a
distance between the police forc
of the community.
So, I would be a strong advocate
policing, where you actually spe
in the neighborhoods, getting to
getting a sense of how people re
helping them see that you're not
a threat.
And you can think about this, ho
interacted -- a very different c
you only interacted with a roman
when you have to fight about som
relationship is probably not goi
well.
If you have many other varied ty
to build, you know, a relationsh
interactions, you're likely to c
baseline or a foundation of trus
when conflicts come to the surfa
more willing to give the benefit
you're more willing to entertain
perspectives.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: What do
of the discourse, though, as it'
in the country today? It just se
cacophonous.
LINDA TROPP: Yes.
It's hard because there are so m
messages. And I think people are
selective in which media outlets
more attention to and regard as
important. And it's important to
that alternate viewpoints of the
groups or entities in those situ
they have valid experiences and
And I think, rather than necessa
sound bites going back and forth
of this broader cacophony that y
that we should try to understand
do people feel that way, get a l
deeper in our analysis and under
group lines, because I think tha
a long way.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Who has
responsibility, do you think, fo
dialogue about race and racism?
LINDA TROPP: Yes.
You know, I think people on all
a bit of responsibility to take.
in particular, white people need
concerned about how they will be
and really more focused on learn
others' perspective.
And I think to the extent that t
with integrity and the best of i
as we were describing before, I
of color will be receptive to th
more willing to engage in conver
And I say I focus on the respons
whites first because I think, of
people of color, or black people
will complain about feeling like
to educate white people, and it
And especially in these types of
where race enters your life on a
basis, to have to say, yes, race
seems a bit tiring, a bit taxing
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, if y
situation like we have in this c
where, as I said, we don't talk
as much as we talk about the pro
do you get past that?
LINDA TROPP: I think multifacete
are usually the most important.
To share a little bit of the wor
my colleagues have done focusing
between groups, actually giving
for real, meaningful, close inte
group boundaries, and what that
not only tends to reduce prejudi
helps to reduce our anxieties ab
interactions in the future.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Finally,
be said that it is always darkes
dawn, and then, during my genera
always darkest just before it ge
(LAUGHTER)
(CROSSTALK)
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Where do
this analysis of the future of r
in this country?
LINDA TROPP: You know, some of m
will tease me, but I try to be h
And at the very least, the way I
is, I think, on some level, ther
always be biases between groups.
what's the alternative? If we do
fight for greater integration, g
justice, then those entities and
try to pull groups apart will on
stronger. So, that's kind of whe
myself.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: It sound
to me.
LINDA TROPP: We got to do what w
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Thank yo
us.
LINDA TROPP: Thank you so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
kind of political battle, this o
and where they should be able to
Special correspondent Spencer Mi
SPENCER MICHELS: Every morning b
high-tech entrepreneur Samir Gho
wife join their 2-year-old son o
of their San Francisco townhouse
with Soki (ph), their 10-year-ol
water dog.
SAMIR GHOSH, Dog Owner: People l
dogs like their children. My fam
do things without the dog. We do
the movies because you can't bri
I moved to San Francisco because
it as a progressive place and ve
SPENCER MICHELS: But Ghosh is wo
the places he takes his dog for
a swim, like Crissy Field, a for
may soon be off-limits for off-l
like Soki.
SAMIR GHOSH: Good girl.
SPENCER MICHELS: Those places ar
Golden Gate National Recreation
national park in and around San
that, unlike all other national
allowed dogs to run free in some
four decades.
SAMIR GHOSH: My understanding is
going to make it completely ille
in this section. Let me ask you,
it is reasonable to say you can'
with your dog?
SPENCER MICHELS: Of the 408 unit
park system, only a handful are
and only one, this one, is havin
dogs. In fact, it's not a battle
It's been going on for 14 years.
is the National Park Service, wh
trying to come up with a new dog
Christine Lehnertz is park super
CHRISTINE LEHNERTZ, National Par
Many of the dogs in this park an
or guardians behave well within
there are enough conflicts that
these go unaddressed.
SPENCER MICHELS: The Park Servic
can document 95 dog bites and at
four recent years, plus 2,700 ot
in addition to many that are nev
And it points to a loss of nativ
in several areas where dogs have
off-leash.
Cindy Margulis is a birder and e
of the Golden Gate chapter of th
Society.
CINDY MARGULIS, Golden Gate Audu
Dogs are notorious for trampling
for scaring off species, particu
And that means you have got to b
where there's wildlife or sensit
and also understand folks are en
be there without having their ex
with by dogs.
SPENCER MICHELS: On the other si
of dog owners who have demonstra
Service meetings over the years.
that some officials have tried,
to get the word recreation taken
name of the Golden Gate National
Area, or the GGNRA.
Sally Stephens runs the San Fran
owners group.
SALLY STEPHENS, San Francisco Do
They're trying to get rid of the
mandate. We were promised this l
stay with the traditional recrea
of the land. And now they're goi
their promises. Basically, what
is planning to do will amount to
loss of public access in the GGN
SPENCER MICHELS: While most nati
include wilderness areas, this b
here is a stunning compilation o
properties. The Presidio of San
a repurposed Army base, is part
as is Fort Funston, a coastal ba
used for hang gliding and dog wa
popular trails near the beach.
And there's Ocean Beach, where t
ends. Off-leash dogs are allowed
be curtailed under proposed rule
Gate National Recreation Area al
Alcatraz Island and, across the
bridge, Muir Woods and Muir Beac
Johnson often walks his dog off-
Johnson, a longtime environmenta
in on the early planning of the
today he's critical of the manag
wants to eliminate most of Muir
off-leash area.
HUEY JOHNSON, Dog Owner: Park Se
has just not been able to handle
park concept. In national parks,
I wouldn't have a dog loose ther
that's why it's here for.
SPENCER MICHELS: But Amy Meyer w
parks' founding too, and she sup
Park Service as it wrestles with
believes are too many dogs.
AMY MEYER, Co-Founder, Golden Ga
Recreation Area: This national p
a huge number of people from all
world. They expect that they're
wild animals, they're going to s
that fosters birds. They're goin
to do hiking, biking. And most o
are not fully compatible with fr
dogs.
SPENCER MICHELS: Meyer says the
of the area has tripled since th
the park founders endorsed off-l
Today, the park gets nearly 18 m
a year, most in the nation.
Have you personally seen any dam
dogs have done?
AMY MEYER: Most certainly. Just
dogs rip up the dunes at Fort Fu
hasn't been a rabbit on Fort Fun
since the mid-1990s.
SPENCER MICHELS: During the many
Park Service has been studying t
it has compiled thousands of pag
studies, comments, revised plans
Is anyone going to read all this
CHRISTINE LEHNERTZ: That is volu
is volume two. The National Park
a federal agency, and we do have
federal laws. We can't cut corne
SPENCER MICHELS: Lehnertz, the p
says she is trying to come up wi
suited to an urban park.
CHRISTINE LEHNERTZ: We do manage
differently because it's in an u
But we have certain mandates, as
agency, that we have to meet in
SPENCER MICHELS: Still, she says
rules come out:
CHRISTINE LEHNERTZ: The GGNRA wi
most liberal policies for allowi
We think dogs are great. We don'
take that away.
SPENCER MICHELS: The Park Servic
new proposed regulations this fa
for more public comment, and com
a final set of rules in about a
But the topic is so contentious,
well invite lawsuits that might
further.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Spen
in San Francisco.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
pope has a new adviser, and he's
Rabbi Robert Alper was one of mo
people who submitted jokes throu
called Joke with the Pope. Alper
carry the honorary title of come
to Pope Francis. Along with the
was awarded $10,000 to donate to
charities.
You can read more about the cont
joke that won it, on our home pa
And now an update on a story we
July. It centered on the Univers
and how the for-profit school ta
military and veterans. This week
put the school on probation. Its
will not be allowed on military
or to attend career fairs. And n
will be able to use tuition assi
the Defense Department.
You can watch our original repor
partnership with Reveal and the
Investigative Reporting, on our
That's PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tune in later tonight for "Washi
And tomorrow's "NewsHour Weekend
high-speed rail in Texas.
That's the "NewsHour" for tonigh
Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
night.